.TH SIFT 1 "April 2026" "sift 1.0.16" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
sift \- AI-powered alert triage summarizer for SOC teams
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sift
.I COMMAND
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ ARGS ]
.PP
.B sift triage
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I FILE\fR\ [\fIFILE\fR\ ...]
.PP
.B sift validate
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I FILE\fR\ [\fIFILE\fR\ ...]
.PP
.B sift doctor
.PP
.B sift metrics
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I FILE
.PP
.B sift config
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.PP
.B sift version
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sift
ingests alerts from SIEM systems (JSON, Splunk JSON, CSV), deduplicates and clusters
them by IOC overlap and time proximity, scores each cluster by risk, and produces a
prioritized triage report.
.PP
AI-generated summaries are opt-in via
.BR \-\-summarize .
Core clustering is fully rule-based and works without any API keys.
IOC enrichment via external APIs (VirusTotal, barb-phish) is opt-in and requires
explicit consent.
.PP
.B sift
reads configuration from
.I ~/.sift/config.yaml
and credentials from
.IR ~/.sift/.env .
All settings can be managed with
.BR "sift config" .
.
.SH COMMANDS
.
.SS triage
Process one or more alert files and produce a prioritized triage report.
Multiple files and directories are supported; alerts are correlated across all sources
before clustering.
.PP
.B "sift triage"
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I FILE\fR\ [\fIFILE\fR\ ...]
.PP
Arguments:
.RS 4
.TP
.I FILE
Alert file (JSON, Splunk JSON, CSV, NDJSON) or directory.
Use
.B \-
to read from stdin.
Directories are scanned recursively for
.IR .json ", " .csv ", " .ndjson ", and " .log
files.
.RE
.PP
Output options:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format " " \fIFMT\fR
Output format.
One of
.BR rich " (default), " console ", " json ", " csv ", " stix .
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIPATH\fR
Save output to file.
For
.B rich
format the terminal output is shown and a JSON copy is written to
.IR PATH .
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress the banner and status lines.
.RE
.PP
AI summarization options:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-summarize
Generate a triage summary.
Uses the configured LLM provider (default:
.BR template ).
The
.B template
provider requires no API key and produces a structured summary without AI.
For AI-generated summaries use
.BR \-\-provider " " anthropic
or another LLM provider.
.TP
.BR \-\-provider " " \fIPROVIDER\fR
LLM provider for summarization.
One of
.BR template " (no key), " anthropic ", " openai ", " ollama .
Overrides the default set in
.IR config.yaml .
.RE
.PP
IOC enrichment options:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-\-enrich " " \fIMODE\fR
Enrich extracted IOCs.
.I MODE
is one of:
.BR local " (heuristics only, no external API), "
.BR barb " (phishing URL analysis), "
.BR vex " (VirusTotal reputation), "
.BR all " (barb + vex; default when flag is used without MODE)."
External modes (barb, vex, all) require consent (see
.BR \-\-yes ).
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Skip the interactive consent prompt for external enrichment API calls.
.RE
.PP
Privacy options:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-\-redact\-fields " " \fIFIELDS\fR
Comma-separated list of alert fields to redact before AI submission
(e.g.\&
.IR user,host,source_ip ).
Overrides the default set in
.IR config.yaml .
.RE
.PP
Other options:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-\-filter " " \fIEXPR\fR
Filter clusters by expression (e.g.\&
.IR "priority >= HIGH" ).
Supports
.BR AND ", " OR ", " NOT ", " IN ", " NOT_IN
and comparisons
.BR == ", " != ", " < ", " > ", " <= ", " >= .
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-cache
Disable result caching for this run (cache is on by default).
.TP
.BR \-\-help\-all
Show all options including expert flags (chunk-size, drop-raw, no-dedup, etc.).
.RE
.PP
Exit codes:
.RS 4
.TP
.B 0
No critical clusters found.
.TP
.B 1
One or more critical clusters found.
.TP
.B 2
Error (bad input, missing file, parse failure).
.RE
.
.SS validate
Parse and validate alert files without running the full pipeline.
Reports the detected format and alert count for each file.
Useful for testing ingestion pipelines and verifying file formats before triage.
.PP
.B "sift validate"
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I FILE\fR\ [\fIFILE\fR\ ...]
.PP
Exit codes:
.B 0
= all files valid,
.B 2
= one or more errors.
.
.SS doctor
Run diagnostic checks on the sift environment.
Reports Python version, installed dependencies (anthropic, openai, barb, vex),
LLM API key status, output directory, result cache, and module health.
.PP
.B "sift doctor"
.PP
Exit codes:
.B 0
= all checks passed or warned (warnings indicate optional features),
.B 1
= at least one check failed.
.
.SS metrics
Show statistics for alert files: cluster count, priority distribution,
IOC type breakdown, and alert counts.
.PP
.B "sift metrics"
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I FILE
.PP
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress the banner.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-dedup
Skip deduplication before computing metrics.
.RE
.
.SS config
Show or update persistent configuration.
Settings are written to
.IR ~/.sift/config.yaml .
The LLM API key is stored separately in
.I ~/.sift/.env
(mode 600) and never written to
.IR config.yaml .
.PP
.B "sift config"
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.PP
Credential options:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-\-api\-key " " \fIKEY\fR
Set the LLM API key (stored as
.B SIFT_LLM_KEY
in
.IR ~/.sift/.env ).
.TP
.BR \-\-unset\-api\-key
Remove the LLM API key from
.IR ~/.sift/.env .
.RE
.PP
Summarization defaults:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-\-provider " " \fIPROVIDER\fR
Default LLM provider:
.BR template ", " anthropic ", " openai ", " ollama .
.TP
.BR \-\-model " " \fIMODEL\fR
Default LLM model name (e.g.\&
.IR claude-opus-4-6 ).
.RE
.PP
Output defaults:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-\-quiet / \-\-no\-quiet
Enable or disable quiet mode by default.
.TP
.BR \-\-default\-format " " \fIFMT\fR
Default output format for
.B sift triage
(rich, console, json, csv, stix).
.RE
.PP
Pipeline defaults:
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-\-chunk\-size " " \fIN\fR
Default clustering chunk size (0 = auto-tune).
.TP
.BR \-\-cache / \-\-no\-cache
Enable or disable result caching by default.
.TP
.BR \-\-enrich\-consent / \-\-no\-enrich\-consent
Pre-approve consent for external enrichment API calls.
.TP
.BR \-\-redact\-fields " " \fIFIELDS\fR
Default fields to redact before AI submission (comma-separated).
Use an empty string to clear.
.RE
.PP
.RS 4
.TP
.BR \-\-show
Print the current configuration as YAML.
.RE
.
.SS version
Print the installed sift version and exit.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Triage a single alert file with rich terminal output:
.RS 4
.B sift triage alerts.json
.RE
.PP
Triage multiple sources and correlate across them:
.RS 4
.B sift triage firewall.json endpoint.csv siem/
.RE
.PP
Read from stdin (pipe from another tool):
.RS 4
.B cat alerts.json | sift triage \-
.RE
.PP
Generate a JSON report and save to file:
.RS 4
.B sift triage alerts.json \-f json \-o report.json
.RE
.PP
Generate an AI triage summary using Anthropic:
.RS 4
.B sift triage alerts.json \-\-summarize \-\-provider anthropic
.RE
.PP
Enrich IOCs with local heuristics (no external API):
.RS 4
.B sift triage alerts.json \-\-enrich local
.RE
.PP
Enrich with VirusTotal and barb-phish (requires consent):
.RS 4
.B sift triage alerts.json \-\-enrich all \-\-yes
.RE
.PP
Redact sensitive fields before AI submission:
.RS 4
.B sift triage alerts.json \-\-summarize \-\-redact\-fields user,host,source_ip
.RE
.PP
Filter output to high-priority clusters only:
.RS 4
.B sift triage alerts.json \-\-filter "priority >= HIGH"
.RE
.PP
Export a STIX 2.1 bundle:
.RS 4
.B sift triage alerts.json \-f stix \-o bundle.json
.RE
.PP
Validate files before triage:
.RS 4
.B sift validate alerts.json splunk.json siem/
.RE
.PP
Configure Anthropic as the default provider:
.RS 4
.B sift config \-\-api\-key sk\-ant\-... \-\-provider anthropic
.RE
.PP
Set default redact fields and quiet mode:
.RS 4
.B sift config \-\-redact\-fields user,host \-\-quiet
.RE
.PP
Show all expert flags:
.RS 4
.B sift triage \-\-help\-all
.RE
.PP
Run diagnostics:
.RS 4
.B sift doctor
.RE
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.sift/config.yaml
Persistent user configuration. Created automatically on first use.
Managed by
.BR "sift config" .
.TP
.I ~/.sift/.env
LLM API key storage (mode 600). Written by
.BR "sift config \-\-api\-key" .
Contains
.B SIFT_LLM_KEY=<key>
and is never included in
.IR config.yaml .
.TP
.I ~/.sift/cache.db
SQLite result cache (WAL mode). Stores triage results with a 1-hour TTL.
Cache is on by default; disable per-run with
.BR \-\-no\-cache .
.TP
.I ~/.sift/version_check.json
Stores the last PyPI version check timestamp to avoid repeated network calls.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SIFT_LLM_KEY
LLM API key. Equivalent to setting it with
.BR "sift config \-\-api\-key" .
When both
.B SIFT_LLM_KEY
and
.I ~/.sift/.env
are present the environment variable takes precedence.
.
.SH INPUT FORMATS
.B sift
auto-detects the input format:
.TP
.B Generic JSON
Array of alert objects with arbitrary field names.
Field mapping is inferred from common naming patterns
(title, description, severity, src_ip, dst_ip, etc.).
.TP
.B Splunk JSON
Output of Splunk search commands
.RB ( results
key with per-event fields).
.TP
.B CSV
Comma-separated values with a header row.
.TP
.B NDJSON / .log
Newline-delimited JSON; one alert object per line.
.
.SH OUTPUT FORMATS
.TP
.B rich
Colored terminal table with cluster cards, IOC lists, and priority badges (default).
.TP
.B console
Plain-text terminal output without Rich markup.
.TP
.B json
Full-fidelity JSON export of the triage report.
.TP
.B csv
Flat per-alert CSV with cluster and priority columns.
.TP
.B stix
STIX 2.1 bundle containing threat indicator objects for each cluster.
.
.SH PIPELINE
Alerts are processed in the following order:
.PP
.RS 4
Ingest \(-> Normalize \(-> Deduplicate \(-> Extract IOCs \(->
Cluster \(-> Prioritize \(-> Enrich (opt) \(-> Summarize (opt) \(-> Output
.RE
.PP
For large inputs (>50 MB) the ingestion stage streams line-by-line to avoid
loading the entire file into memory.
Files larger than 500 MB are processed in batches of 100,000 alerts (sub-file chunking).
.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success.
For
.B sift triage
this means no critical clusters were found.
.TP
.B 1
.BR "sift triage" :
one or more clusters with
.B CRITICAL
priority were found.
.BR "sift doctor" :
at least one diagnostic check failed.
.TP
.B 2
Error — bad input, missing file, parse failure, or invalid flag value.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR jq (1),
.BR grep (1)
.PP
Project homepage and documentation:
.I https://github.com/duathron/sift
.PP
PyPI package:
.I https://pypi.org/project/sift-triage/
.
.SH AUTHOR
Christian Huhn <https://github.com/duathron>
